B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
MARKETING STRATEGY
FOR B2B
by Stephan Wenger
HOW A B2B
MARKETING
STRATEGY IS
DEVELOPEDMarketing Strategy. Marketing Plan. Marketing Tacti c. There are
different terms to describe the purpose of your B2B  marketing
efforts. However, these terms describe different as pects of
modern marketing. This article not only defines the se phrases
but also outlines the correlation between the compa ny vision
and aims. Michael Porter describes three generic ma rketing
strategy types: Differentiation, Cost Leadership an d Focus. The
most celebrated marketing strategy of recent years,  however, is
simple: answer customers’ questions. “They ask, you  answer” by
Marcus Sheridan is a genius marketing strategy targ eting
modern, digital customers. Reading this article, yo u can develop
a proper marketing strategy.STRATEGYWHAT IS A B2B MARKETING STRATEGY?
Vision: Travel the world and enjoy diverse cultures
Aim: Visit the town behind the mountains
Strategy: Take the river
Tactic: Use a boat
Plan: Row with two paddles simultaneouslyA marketing strategy is a top-level plan for reachi ng a defined target group and turning them into
customers of their products or services. A good mar keting strategy revolves around the very
foundation of the company: its core values, brand p ositioning, target market and target group.
Marketing centric companies put their marketing str ategy on a level with the companies’ strategic
goals. In such customer-centric companies, all othe r strategies, like the sales strategy,
digitalization strategy, market entry strategy, R&D  strategy and alike, are derived from the
marketing strategy.
The terminology strategy is easy to understand and yet hard to grasp in detail. Aim, tactic, plan,
vision, and strategy are often used synonymously. A  grave mistake. Here’s an easy to remember
mnemonic.B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
Tactic:  Use a BoatVision:  Travel the World
Aim: Visit the Town behind the Mountains
Strategy:  Take the River
Plan:  Take two PaddlesDIFFERENT B2B MARKETING STRATEGY TYPES
Differentiation
Focus
Cost LeadershipA marketing strategy is inseparably linked to the m arket on which the company acts. The market
centers on the company strategy and main company ai m. Michael Porter developed three generic
strategies to do so:
The company targets a mass market and aims to diffe rentiate its portfolio from the competition.
The concept of “unique selling proposition – USP” d escribes criteria making a product or service
stand out. A highly differentiated portfolio allows  higher prices because it fulfills customer needs
better than the competition.
 
A clearly defined, very specific niche market typic ally has less competition. The high degree of
specialization increases market entry barriers and make a well-developed niche profitable. Instead
of competing head to head in a mass market, a niche  strategy aims to develop outstanding
knowledge of this narrow-defined market segment.
 
This resource- and efficiency-based strategy intend s to provide the best price-value ratio. The
lowest possible costs allow low prices for the same  quality as the competition. This strategy works
well in price-sensitive markets in which cost advan tages are long-standing.
The marketing strategy consequently needs to descri be tactics and actions to serve these generic
company strategies. A common B2B Marketing strategy  framework is the Four Ps of the marketing
mix: product, price, place, and promotion. Expanded  concepts are the Seven Ps, adding People,
Processes, and Physical Evidence to the 4Ps. This c omprehensive comparison explains the
differences between Business-to-Consumer Marketing and Busines-to-Business Marketing.
Porter’s three generic strategies are a common appr oach to the subject. However, there are
multiple ways on how to differentiate between marke ting strategies in B2B. One of the most
celebrated approaches has been put into writing by Marcus Sheridan in his bestselling book “They
ask, you answer”, a new and highly successful strat egy to target the modern, digital customer.B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
The benefits of a marketing strategy are a clear pa th to meet your aims and fulfill your vision. The
tactics and the plan to bring your tactics to life derive from the marketing strategy. This basic
principle holds for all market types, including B2B  and B2C markets. Therefore, a B2B Marketing
Strategy has the same foundation as a B2C Marketing  Strategy. The vision, aim, strategy details,
tactic, and plan are different from company to comp any and depend on many influencing factors.B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
THEY ASK, YOU ANSWER
The title of the book is the idea briefly. Customer s ask a question, and the company answers them.
This is such an easy truth and yet so impactful and  hard to realize in practice. The core idea is that
potential customers ask questions along the whole c ustomer journey.
Think about yourself when buying any random product . You probably ask yourself if this is the right
choice, how the product works, if any given feature  is necessary for your demand, what the product
specification means if the product also fulfills yo ur need that is slightly out of the intended usage,
etc. Thinking about it, a customer probably has 100  more questions for a complex B2B product.
The marketing strategy aims to answer many customer  questions in an honest and non-
promotional way. It is the mother of “educational c ontent” – a content type that increases the
customer’s know-how instead of targeting his emotio ns. One may say this is the counterpart to
intuitive, emotional selling. The more a customer k nows, the better it is for the company—an
outstanding strategy at first glance.B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
Pricing and Cost
Problems
Versus and Comparisons
Best in class and ReviewsCustomers want to know how much they pay. And ultim ately, they will get an answer to this
question. So why hide prices in B2B in the first pl ace? The same is true for running costs.
Customers not only have a reasonable right to know the running costs, but they will also discover
in the long run and damage your business with bad w ord-of-mouth if you have not been honest
from the start.Will your competitor see the prices?  Well, yes – but he knows them anyhow. Be sure
of that fact.Does your service have a price range? Give customers an average or a rough
estimation.Your goods are high priced, and you are afraid to scare away customers? Better let them
know early in the process and not after your sales team has put effort into the opportunity. Or even
better, outline the increased value your product de livers for the high price.You get the point …
 
EVERY product and service have a weakness. It is tr ustworthy and fair to talk about these
weaknesses. Customers will decide if this very weak ness is a showstopper for them or not. Talking
about problems is hard. But it creates an atmospher e of honesty, transparency, and trust. This will
pay off in the long run. Especially for industrial goods often sold based on trust and long-term
relationships.
 
Nike vs. Adidas. Apple vs. Samsung. Your company vs . your biggest competitor. People like content
that is easy to digest and answers questions straig ht away. What can I expect from you and what
from your competitor? By providing this content typ e, your customer will see if your offer matches
his need or not. This creates a clear expectation f or the customer. The result is a satisfied customer
or an informed customer buying from your competitor . But it will never be an unsatisfied customer
that harms your reputation.If you have no advantage  over your competitors, you may have to circle
back to Porter’s generic strategies to create one.
 
These content types are similar based on the princi ple we already discussed: people love to
compare: themselves, products, and services. Best i n class and reviews showcase your solution
compared to others. This is done in a storytelling way, using a holistic perspective instead of a
single feature.Also, with this aspect, the honest a pproach and value-adding content aim to educate
the potential customer. This strategy creates a com prehensive overview for the customer and
strengthens your position in this market.
“You ask, they Answer” is an interesting and effect ive B2B marketing strategy. Taken to the
extreme, the idea of answering customers’ questions  at all costs is a company philosophy. And at
the same time, a sales strategy, digital strategy, and content marketing strategy. This powerful
approach to the modern digital customer allows Busi ness-to-Business marketing teams to position
the company as a know-how leader. A hard to beat br and promise.HOW A B2B MARKETING STRATEGY IS DEVELOPED
Let’s repeat what we discussed earlier. A strategy is a company’s top-level plan on meeting a
defined target group to achieve a certain company a im. The company aim serves to fulfill the
vision. Therefore, a strategy is always derived fro m a bigger picture. This picture’s single dots and
pixels are defined in the marketing strategy, outli ned in the marketing tactics and concretized in
the marketing plan.B 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
Step #1 – Define marketing aims
Step #2 – Analyze the status quo
Step #3 – Define your target group and buying cente r personas (BCP)
Step #4 – Describe the customer journey. Your B2B M arketing Tactic.The 6 steps to create a marketing strategy in B2B a re:
 
The marketing aims are derived from the company aim . All marketing aims are bound to contribute
to a larger purpose of succeeding in the defined B2 B market.
 
You may create your strategy the first time or work  on your annual update. The analysis phase
increases your knowledge about the current state to  understand what is necessary to meet the
ideal state of your desired marketing purpose.
 
“Everybody” is not a target group. In industrial ma rkets, your target group is not necessarily a
single person. The so-called “buying center”, a gro up of people with different roles, is typical for
B2B. The classic target group definition works and modern concepts of buying personas.
 
A customer journey is an ideal path a potential cus tomer takes from first interest to a loyal
customer. During his journey, a prospect contacts y ou multiple times until he converts to a
customer. These touchpoints, offline and online, ar e defined and described in the customer journey
map. This is the core of your strategy. It answers the question, “how do I target my future
customers?”Step #1:  Define Aims
Step #2:  Analyze Status
Step #3:  Define Target Group
Step #4:  Describe Customer Journey
Step #5:  Create Marketing Plan
Step #6:  Measure your ResultsB 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
Step#5 – Create your B2B marketing plan
Step #6 – Make your results measurableThe marketing plan itself reflects the first 4 step s. It is a comprehensive, actionable plan that
describes details on how to address the target grou p. Channels and contents are mapped with the
customer journey. A storyline is also part of your marketing plan. Here, a marketing plan is the
game plan and focuses on “how” instead of “why”.For  internal communication purposes, make sure
to add an executive summary of your plan. A strateg y is good, but a self-explanatory one-page
marketing plan is better. Management will thank you .
 
Marketing controlling is a necessity. Modern digita l marketing is based on KPIs and big data. This
final step of your marketing strategy closes the lo op to your analysis and make actions
measurable. You better know which half of the budge t is spent in vain, right?Step #1:  Define Aims
Step #2:  Analyze Status
Step #3:  Define Target Group
Step #4:  Describe Customer Journey
Step #5:  Create Marketing Plan
Step #6:  Measure your ResultsB 2 B  M A R K E T I N G  W O R L D
SUMMARY
Step #1 – Define marketing aims
Step #2 – Analyze the status quo
Step #3 – Define your target group and buying cente r personas (BCP)
Step #4 – Describe the customer journey. Your B2B M arketing Tactic.
Step#5 – Create your B2B marketing plan
Step #6 – Make your results measurableA marketing strategy is a business’s most important  plan for reaching the target group, part of a
defined B2B market, intending to turn them into cus tomers. The center of a proper marketing
strategy orbits the company’s core value, including  brand and company vision. This vision defines
the marketing aim that determines the marketing str ategy. Once you have your strategy specified,
the tactic to get there results in an actionable ma rketing plan.
There are many approaches to creating a B2B marketi ng strategy. Markets and marketing are
closely linked. The three generic market strategies  by M. Porter give a basic strategy framework. A
new approach, however, is “They ask, you answer” by  Marcus Sheridan. The simplicity of answering
customers’ questions as a strategy is genius. The i dea is to gain trust by being honest and helpful.
A company that follows this simple truth is bound t o be recognized as a know-how leader. A
competitive advantage that is hard to beat.
All strategy frameworks have the same basic 6 steps  in common. Conducted as a closes circle,
these steps are:
Details are described in How to create your B2B Mar keting Strategy in 6 steps, Part I and Part II